Dedicated Page about Web3 and Polkadot (#5187)
w3f/polkadot-wiki: docs/general/web3-and-polkadot.md

---
id: web3-and-polkadot
title: Web3 and Polkadot
sidebar_label: Web3 and Polkadot
description: Introduction to Web3 and Polkadot's Role in shaping the Web3 Vision.
keywords: [web3, polkadot, light clients, decentralization]
slug: ../web3-and-polkadot
---

Back in the early 2000's the internet featured read-only, static, basic web pages. The online
connected world at the time was only the beginning of virtual data, identities, and more. The

> internet during this time was also called the Web1.

Reviewer: It is called Web1 in retrospect. Back then, it was called just Internet.

```suggestion
connected world at the time was only the beginning of virtual data, identities, and more. The
internet during this time can be viewed as its first version (Web1).
```

As social media platforms and online businesses began to emerge, the internet transformed into the

> Web2. This upgraded internet, which we still use today, features dynamic, interactive web pages,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As social media platforms and online businesses began to emerge, the internet transformed into its next iteration - the
Web2. This upgraded internet, which we use today, features dynamic, interactive web pages,
```

where users can read and write information and publish their own for others to see. However, this
version of the web comes with downsides, dealing with data control, privacy issues, and the

> consequences of trusting centralized entities storing our data in their servers. This is where Web3

Reviewer: ```suggestion
consequences of trusting centralized entities storing our data on their servers. This is where Web3
```

comes into the picture.

Web3 is turning centralized infrastructure and applications into decentralized, trust-free
protocols. The goal is to transform the internet into a decentralized web, where users control their
data and identity in a trust-free environment. The Web3 movement aims to remove intermediaries and
build trustless infrastructure. Web3 is an interactive and collaborative web where users can read,

> write, and **own** data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Web3 is transforming applications hosted on centralized infrastructure into decentralized applications (dApps) powered by trust-free blockchain
protocols. The goal is to transform the internet into a decentralized web, where users control their
data and identity in a trust-free environment. The Web3 movement aims to remove intermediaries and
build trustless infrastructure. Web3 is an interactive and collaborative web where users can read,
write, and **own** data.
```

:::note The Web3 Movement

To learn more about the Web3 movement, check out this video from the
[Web3 Summit](https://youtu.be/l44z35vabvA)

:::

## Data Ownership

In web3, ownership is achieved through cryptography. Each user has a digital identity bound to a set
of cryptographic keys usually based on the public key cryptographic scheme, i.e. the famous **public

> and private key pair**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In web3, ownership is achieved and validated through cryptography. Each user has a digital identity bound to a set
of cryptographic keys usually based on the public key cryptographic scheme, i.e., the famous **public
and private key pair**.
```

Users onboarding into the web3 must generate a key pair. The public key is the identity that can be
shared with anybody to send you messages, while the private key is used to access your account, sign
messages, transfer funds, edit identity details, etc. [Keeping your private key secure](./scams.md)
from third parties is essential to avoid identity theft with consequent loss of funds, and it is one
of the main factors hindering web3 adoption. Nobody will ever ask you to share your private key, and
who attempt to do so will likely try to steal your digital identity and anything you own related to

> it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike Web2 which is driven by email IDs, phone numbers, and passwords, users onboarding to Web3 just need to generate a key pair. The public key can be the identity that can be
shared with anybody to send you messages or assets, while the private key is used to access your account, sign
messages, transfer funds, edit identity details, etc. [Keeping your private key secure](./scams.md)
is essential to avoid identity theft or consequent loss of funds. Currently, It is one
of the main factors hindering web3 adoption. No legitimate person or entity will ever ask you to share your private key, and
those who attempt to do so are likely trying to steal your digital identity and anything you own related to
it.
```

To mitigate risks of key mismanagement (for **non-custodial** accounts, i.e. when you have custody

> of your keys) there are account abstraction solutions that separate the key management from the user

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of your keys) there are [account abstraction](../learn/learn-account-abstraction) solutions that separate the key management from the user
```

separate the key management from the user experience. To mitigate key hacks, there are cold wallet

> solutions where the private key is generated on dedicated devices that cannot connect to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
solutions where the private key is generated and stored on dedicated devices with secure elements that are not exposed to the
```

internet (see [Ledger](./ledger.md)), or dedicated applications that can be installed on air-gapped
devices such as phones (see [Polkadot Vault](./polkadot-vault.md)). For **custodial** accounts, you
trust third parties to manage your keys and give you access whenever needed.

> To sum up, data ownership comes from the fact that any message you sign with your private key comes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To summarize, data ownership comes from the fact that any message you sign with your private key comes
```

from your digital identity, and the signature proof can be cryptographically verified. Unless
someone else stole your identity, you and only you signed that message and own or are responsible

> for the information in it. Transferring an [NFT](./learn-nft-index) between two accounts is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from your digital identity, and the signature proof can be cryptographically verified. Unless
someone else stole your keys, you and only you are held accountable for signing the messages and are responsible for the information on your account. Transferring an [NFT](./learn-nft-index) between two accounts is
```

essentially a transfer of ownership.

## Trustless Environment

Cryptography also brings the possibility of building a trustless environment where we do not have to
trust third parties, or have any relationship between the sender and receiver of a message. We do
not need to trust centralized entities since we can verify who wrote the message and who owns what
just by using cryptography. Trust is embedded in the code. Well-audited and reviewed code will

> ultimately provide a solid, trustless environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
just by using cryptography. Trust is embedded in the code. Well-audited and reviewed code
ultimately provides a solid, trustless environment.
```

## Data Immutability

But what if the data we own can be easily modified or tampered with after they have been signed and
stored?

> Here is where **blockchain** plays an important role. Blockchains are distributed state machines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is where **blockchain** technology plays an important role. Blockchain networks comprise of distributed state machines
```

> Here is where **blockchain** plays an important role. Blockchains are essentially databases where
> data are stored within blocks concatenated using hash functions, where, for example the hash of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Here is where **blockchain** plays an important role. Blockchains are distributed state machines where increments of data are stored within blocks that build on each other using hash functions. For example, the hash of
```

example, the hash of block `N + 1` contains data of that block together with the hash of the
previous block `N`. This creates the situation where if you modify the content of block `N` you will
change the hash of block `N + 1`, `N + 2`, etc. You will need to modify quite a lot of data, and in
proof-of-stake blockchains like {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} such
attack is financially expensive, and attempting to do it will get you

> [slashed](../learn/learn-staking-advanced.md#slashing).

Reviewer: This needs to be clarified. It is not expensive, but practically impossible to modify data in a block and keep the chain of hashes intact. This is true for all blockchains. It is a property of the blockchain data structure.

The attack scenario you are mentioning is different. Block producers may try to add invalid transactions in a new block and add the invalid block to the blockchain. Such attempts will be heavily punished in networks like Polkadot.

```suggestion
change the hash of block `N + 1`, `N + 2`, etc. essentially breaking the chain. Although it can be possible to add an invalid block (a block with invalid transactions) or censor certain transactions, if the blockchain network is nor sufficiently decentralized. In decentralized proof-of-stake blockchains like {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} such attacks are financially expensive, and attempting to do it can get you
[slashed](../learn/learn-staking-advanced.md#slashing).
```

So, with blockchain as a means of storing data permanently without any option to modify them, we can

> ensure that what we sign with our digital identity will not be modified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, with blockchain as a means of storing data and transactions permanently without an option to modify them, we can
ensure what we cryptographically sign with our digital identity is set in stone digitally.
```

## Data Availability

But what if our data are stored in a blockchain, but that blockchain is run on a centralized server
or by different computers belonging to the same operator?

That server or those computers can be easily shut down, the blockchain can be stopped from running
and its data wiped out. This can be achieved from the inside by the malicious network participants
or from the outside by regulatory rules and other forces. So, we would own our data, which would be
immutable because stored on a blockchain, but that blockchain would be easily stopped. There would

> be little sense in owning something that can easily cease to exist in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or from the outside by regulatory rules and other forces. Though blockchain offers immutability, there would
be little sense in using a centralized blockchain to prove ownership as it can possibly cease to exist in the future.
```

Data availability is dependent on how resilient the blockchain is. Resiliency is achieved through

> decentralization, economic incentives, on-chain governance, and on-chain treasury funds to ensure

Reviewer 2: I think on-chain governance might be enough to mention, as it implies that a treasury is needed in every context where a blockchain/decentralization is existant.

```suggestion
decentralization, economic incentives, and on-chain governance to ensure
```

> network can run and upgrade on its own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
elements such as decentralization, economic incentives, and on-chain governance to ensure the
network can sustain on its own.
```

### Decentralization

Having multiple nodes belonging to numerous independent identities increases network resiliency and
thus data availability.

Blockchain is a state machine, and consensus must be achieved on one and only one possible state
transition. Having an overly decentralized network will create a situation in which consensus is
reached after an extended period, and energy might be wasted to unnecessarily run nodes that add
little resiliency and slow down network throughput. A trade-off between a few centralized nodes and

> too many of them must be considered.

Reviewer: Though the modified content may sound technical, the information presented is sound. 

```suggestion
Blockchain is a state machine, and consensus must be achieved on every single state
transition by every node on the blockchain network. In Proof of Work (PoW) based blockchains, which let any node in the network produce a block, consensus is achieved probabilistically by building on the longest chain (at the cost of energy-intensive computations). Proof of Stake (PoS) based blockchains like Polkadot enable deterministic
consensus by allowing only a limited number of privileged nodes to produce blocks. A PoW blockchain can be considered centralized if a single entity can capture 51% of network nodes. Similarly, a PoS blockchain can be considered centralized if a single entity controls more than one-third of nodes, as a two-thirds majority is required to arrive at a deterministic consensus. Different blockchains have different levels of decentralization.
```

> Nowadays, most of the nodes are not run at people's homes. Equipment is rented through service

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nowadays, most of the nodes cannot be run on consumer-grade hardware. Node running equipment is typically rented through service
```

providers. Resiliency is also achieved by ensuring nodes run on as many different providers as
possible and avoiding a significant share of the nodes being run under the same provider in the same

> country. A legislation change could undermine a big fraction of the nodes and potentially stop the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
possible and avoiding a significant share of the nodes being run under the same provider in the same
geographic region. A legislation change or a natural disaster could impact a considerable fraction of the nodes and potentially stop the
```

network. {{ polkadot: Pokadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} level of decentralization can
be explored through the [Polkawatch app](https://polkawatch.app/).

The [One Thousand Validator Programme](./thousand-validators.md) aims to incentivize the creation of
new validator nodes to increase the level of node decentralization.

### Decentralized Storage

> Blockspace is limited and valuable. Not all data we have can be stored on the blockchain. Large

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Blockspace](./glossary/#blockspace) is limited and valuable. Not all data we have can be stored on the blockchain. Large
```

> the blockchain. Large files like pictures, music, movies, etc., will never be held on the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the blockchain. Large files like pictures, music, movies, etc., typically will never be held on the
```

blockchain. But where can we stored those files? To stick to the web3 vision, we need a resilient
and decentralized storage solution.

The most important thing is that the proof of ownership is stored on the blockchain.

Conversely, large files and their metadata can be uploaded on decentralized storage networks such as

> IPFS. The Polkadot parachain Crust also provided a similar storage solution.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important thing is that the proof of ownership is stored on the blockchain through the hashes of data and metadata. The files are uploaded on decentralized storage networks hosting protocols like IPFS. 
```

### Stake Allocation

In Proof-of-Stake blockchains, security is dictated by how much stake is locked on-chain (financial
security). In a decentralized network, you want to ensure that the difficulty level for a financial

> attack to happen is equal across all nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
attack to happen is equally difficult across all nodes.
```

{{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }}'s
[election algorithm](../learn/learn-phragmen.md) makes sure that the stake is maximized across all
active validators, and the variance in stake across validators is minimized as much as possible.

### Economic Incentives

> Strong incentives are essential to avoid spam attacks and incentivize network participants to run

Reviewer: spam attacks are avoided by imposing fees.

```suggestion
Strong incentives are essential to incentivize network participants to run
```

But from where are those incentives coming from? Polkadot's native token
[DOT is inflationary](../learn/learn-inflation.md). Inflation is used to pay validators for running
nodes and reward nominators for providing the necessary stake to secure the network. Depending on
the staking rate, part of the inflation is diverted to the treasury.

### Governance and Treasury

In {{ polkadot: Polkadot :polkadot }}{{ kusama: Kusama :kusama }} an on-chain
[treasury](../learn/learn-polkadot-opengov-treasury.md) together with an
[open governance](../learn/learn-polkadot-opengov.md) model allow to access funds in a fully
decentralized manner without any bank transaction whatsoever. This opens up the possibility to come
to a decision through on-chain voting mechanism, promoting a sense of community and creating an
independent socio-economical environment.

## Decentralized Access Points

But what if we have data we own stored on a resilient blockchain, but the only way to access the
blockchain is through an RPC server? Whoever is behind the server or an attacker could present us
data that is not the truth. We trust the server provider that the data we see is the truth. How can

> we verify that the data are true without trusting anybody?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data that is not the truth. How can we trustlessly verify that the data is true?
```

Here is where light clients play a key role. Light clients are clients that can sit on a web browser
and can fetch data directly from blockchain full nodes and verify such data using other nodes.

The figure below shows the architectural difference between web2 and web3 applications.

![light-clients](../assets/light-clients.png)

In web2 applications, data are stored on a centralized server, while in web3 applications, data (or
better data proofs) are stored on the blockchain. With light clients, we can access blockchain data

> through a full node and verify the validity of such data by synching to other nodes. In this way, we

Reviewer: A light client just connects/syncs with a single full node. There is no verification step involved with syncing to other nodes.

```suggestion
through a full node and verify the validity. In this way, we
```

Author: I thought that light clients fetch data from a full node and then verify them because they sync with other nodes (5-10). @bhargavbh I remember you explaining this to me, but I might have misunderstood.

Reviewer: Lightclients verify the headers sent by the full node they are connected to. The full node can be connected to multiple nodes, but the light client only has the capacity to connect to a single node, as far as I know.

Reviewer 3: The light client can verify responses because it has the block header (which includes the state-trie merkle root). It gets this block header by warp syncing (an efficient syncing process) with a full node. It is really an implementation detail as to how many full nodes it uses to warp sync, and i would refrain from mentioning it in wiki. Maybe it can be phrased "through a full node and verify the validity of such data. It efficiently syncs (warp sync incase of polkadot) with full node to obtain (Merkle Root) commitment of the latest chain state, and hence can trustlessly verify any response by full node against the commitment". Depending on the target audience, you can trim details in the above statement.

can always verify that the data we see is the truth, which is done automatically by the light
client. Polkadot has a browser-embedded light client
[Substrate connect](../build/build-substrate.md) that uses the
[smoldot](https://github.com/smol-dot/smoldot) codebase. Most web3 applications today access
blockchain data through a centralized RPC server.

## Interoperability

> But what if we create our identity under one blockchain, one specific consensus? Wouldn't it be
> helpful to use that identity under different consensuses? Transferring information and economic
> value is key to achieving the web3 vision of having a collaborative and trustless internet. Polkadot

Reviewer: Cross chain interoperability of accounts is only one use case of iteroperability, but not a foundational argument for interoperability. This section can benefit from a better start. A summary of this article would be nice to have here https://chain.link/education-hub/blockchain-interoperability

```suggestion
Transferring information and economic
value is key to achieving the web3 vision of having a collaborative and trustless internet. Polkadot
```
